src/content/blog/custom-express-async-handler/index.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Custom Express Async Handler'
description: 'This post is written to teach you how to make your own custom async handler'
date: 2024-10-01
tags: ['backend', 'typescript', 'express', 'asynchronous']
image: './2024.png'
authors: ['Sujal']
---

Working with try catch everytime can be tedious and repetitive. We can use npm packages like `express-async-handler` but why bother installing third party packages when we can make our own custom express async handler.

## 1. Example

### 1.1. Custom express async handler (with Typescript)

Create a `async-handler.ts` file and paste the code below.

```ts
import { Request, Response } from 'express'

interface ErrorSchema {
  // define your error schema here
}

const handleError = (res: Response, error: ErrorSchema) => {
  // handle your error here
}

export const asyncHandler =
  (fn: Function) => (req: Request, res: Response, next: Function) => {
    Promise.resolve(fn(req, res, next)).catch((error) =>
      handleError(res, error),
    )
  }
```

## 2. Explanation

### Higher-order function:

    - The **asyncHandler** is a function that takes another function **(fn)** as an argument and returns a new function.
    - This new function will act as **middleware** in an Express route handler, expecting req, res, and next as parameters, which are typical for Express handlers.

### fn argument:

    - **fn** is a function that represents an **asynchronous** operation (like a route handler).
    - It's expected to return a Promise. This could be anything like interacting with a database, making HTTP requests, or any asynchronous task within an Express route.

### Executing the fn function:

    - Inside the returned function, Promise.resolve(fn(req, res, next)) ensures that whatever **fn** returns is converted into a resolved or rejected promise.
    - Even if **fn** is not explicitly returning a promise (e.g., a synchronous function), this ensures a consistent promise-based behavior.

### Error handling:

    - If **fn** throws an error or its returned promise rejects, .catch() will capture it.
    - The catch block then invokes handleError(res, error), passing the error to a centralized error-handling function handleError (presumably defined elsewhere in the application). This prevents the need for writing repetitive try-catch blocks in each route handler.

## 3. Use case example

```ts
const getAllProducts = asyncHandler(async (req: Request, res: Response) => {
  const product = await ProductModel.find({}).limit(20)

  const productResponse: TGetAllProducts = {
    status: 200,
    data: product,
    success: true,
    message: 'Fetched all the products successfully',
  }

  res.status(200).json(productResponse)
})
```

Commit message:

fixed the blog of setting up mern app with typescript

src/content/blog/custom-express-async-handler/index.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Custom Express Async Handler'
description: 'This blog will teach you how to make your own custom async handler and say Goodbye! to try-catch statements.'
date: 2024-10-01
tags: ['backend', 'typescript', 'express', 'asynchronous']
image: './2024.png'
authors: ['Sujal']
---

Working with try catch everytime can be tedious and repetitive. We can use npm packages like `express-async-handler` but why bother installing third party packages when we can make our own custom express async handler.

## 1. Example

### 1.1. Custom express async handler (with Typescript)

Create a `async-handler.ts` file and paste the code below.

```ts
import { Request, Response } from 'express'

interface ErrorSchema {
  // define your error schema here
}

const handleError = (res: Response, error: ErrorSchema) => {
  // handle your error here
}

export const asyncHandler =
  (fn: Function) => (req: Request, res: Response, next: Function) => {
    Promise.resolve(fn(req, res, next)).catch((error) =>
      handleError(res, error),
    )
  }
```

## 2. Explanation

### Higher-order function:

    - The **asyncHandler** is a function that takes another function **(fn)** as an argument and returns a new function.
    - This new function will act as **middleware** in an Express route handler, expecting req, res, and next as parameters, which are typical for Express handlers.

### fn argument:

    - **fn** is a function that represents an **asynchronous** operation (like a route handler).
    - It's expected to return a Promise. This could be anything like interacting with a database, making HTTP requests, or any asynchronous task within an Express route.

### Executing the fn function:

    - Inside the returned function, Promise.resolve(fn(req, res, next)) ensures that whatever **fn** returns is converted into a resolved or rejected promise.
    - Even if **fn** is not explicitly returning a promise (e.g., a synchronous function), this ensures a consistent promise-based behavior.

### Error handling:

    - If **fn** throws an error or its returned promise rejects, .catch() will capture it.
    - The catch block then invokes handleError(res, error), passing the error to a centralized error-handling function handleError (presumably defined elsewhere in the application). This prevents the need for writing repetitive try-catch blocks in each route handler.

## 3. Use case example

```ts
const getAllProducts = asyncHandler(async (req: Request, res: Response) => {
  const product = await ProductModel.find({}).limit(20)

  const productResponse: TGetAllProducts = {
    status: 200,
    data: product,
    success: true,
    message: 'Fetched all the products successfully',
  }

  res.status(200).json(productResponse)
})
```
